KEP-05: OperatorVersion Owned Resources (#1309)
kudobuilder/kudo: keps/0005-cluster-resources-for-crds.md

> OperatorVersions require the existance of CRDs that are not controlled by Kudo (e.g. ETCD Operator) and require those to be installed when FV is enabled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OperatorVersions require the existence of CRDs that are not controlled by Kudo (e.g. ETCD Operator) and require those to be installed when OV is enabled.
```

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

The installation of an Operator Version can run a plan specified by the Operator Version spec, when the `installPlan` value is specified in `operator.yaml`.  
The value shall match a defined `plan` in the `plans` spec in the OperatorVersion. As with the Instance Status properties, the OperatorVersion will contain

```golang
	PlanStatus       map[string]PlanStatus `json:"planStatus,omitempty"`
	AggregatedStatus AggregatedStatus      `json:"aggregatedStatus,omitempty"`
```

to contain the status information on the execution of the `installPlan`. The runtime logic for executing the plan on OperatorVersion install will be the same core logic that is used in the Instance plan execution.

#### Instance Status update

If Instances of an OperatorVersion are created before the Install plan of the OperatorVersion is successful, the Instance's will remian in a `PENDING` status until the OperatorVersion is successful.

#### Object Owners

> The objects created by the `installPlan` may exist on the cluster before the OperatorVersion is installed. This may be a result of another OperatorVersion requiring the same objects, or the objects being managed externally to KUDO. If so, the OperatorVersion will be appended to the `ownerReferences`. If the object does not exist, then KUDO will create the object with the OperatorVersion as the `ownerReference`, and additionally add an annotation to the object that it was created by KUDO: `kudo.dev/managed: true`. This will be used during cleanup to identify whether the object was created by KUDO or not.

Reviewer: On the topic of owning object and `ownerReferences`. To quote the [GC docs](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/garbage-collection/):
```
Cross-namespace owner references are disallowed by design. This means: 
1) Namespace-scoped dependents can only specify owners in the same namespace, and owners that are cluster-scoped. 
2) Cluster-scoped dependents can only specify cluster-scoped owners, but not namespace-scoped owners.
```
So e.g. a **CRD** (not a CR) is a **cluster-scoped** resource and can't/shall not be owned by a **namespaced OV or O**. The fact that we do it right now and the fact that GC-ing them works is non-deterministic GC behavior and is discouraged.  

So an _Instance_ can install a CRD but it won't/can't be GC-ed when the instance is removed. I guess we'll have to make better use of the `cleanup` plans 🤷‍♂

Author: Good find on this.  It sounds like there's nothing stopping us form using the `ownerReference` field to capture the concept that the CRD (cluster scoped) was installed to support an OV.  The caveat is that we can't expect the Garbage collector to do the cleanup for us.

Since we'll be doing this ourselves, does it make more sense to have an annotation for each OV that's using it?
```yaml
metadata:
  labels:
    kudo.dev/managed: true
    kudo.dev/owned: default/kafka-0.1.3
    kudo.dev/owned: otherns/redis-1.5
...
```

I always find labels easier to read and search with.

Reviewer 2: Multiple Labels with the same key are not allowed. You can send yaml like this, but only one of them get persisted.

Apart from that I would agree that we should use labels. I'm not sure if we can rely on ownerReferences be settable across namespaces. Even if it works now, it might get denied in a future K8s version when validation is tighter.

Maybe finalizers would work?
```yaml
finalizer:
  - kudo_owner: default/kafka-0.1.3
  - kudo_owner: otherns/redis-1.5
```

As we have to rely on the Controller anyway for cleanup, that might be a usable way?

Author: Duh.  Absolutely correct.  
One tag setup might better correspond to the Tags used by EKS for cluster autoscaling:

https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/cluster-autoscaler.html

Which would have our tags look like:
```yaml
kudo.dev/operator-version/default/kafka-0.1.3/owned: true
kudo.dev/operator-version/default/redis-1.5.0/owned: true
```

I lean towards Labels over annotations/finalizers to allow for answering questions like "Which OVs use this CRD?" and "Which CRDs are owned by this OV?"

Reviewer 2: Yeah, that would work.
We should add finalizers for each OV as well, though, to prevent someone from deleting the installed CRDs

If the object already exists, but does not match the spec provided by the `installPlan`, the `installPlan` will fatally error and the OperatorVersion's status will be set to `FatalError`. We will not support updating/changing existing objects as part of an install since this may change how components not managed by this OperatorVersion would function.

#### Uninstalls and Object Cleanup

> When an OperatorVersion is uninstalled, KUDO will remove the OperatorVersion from the `ownerReference`. If there are no more `ownerReferences`, it will look for the `kudo.dev/managed: true` annotation to identify if this object is no longer needed on the cluster. If that annotation is there, it will remove the object. If it is not there, then the object must have existed before installing any OperatorVersions and is managed by a component outside of KUDO, and will remain on the cluster.

Reviewer 2: One potential problem that I see here is that we might remove a CRD that is used by somebody else. We handle the case where the CRD is already present before KUDO tries to install it, by adding KUDO to the ownerReferences.

Can we safely assume that any other user of a certain CRD would add itself to the CRD's ownerReferences as well if it uses it? I.e., KUDO installs CRD X, then another software A tries to install CRD X as well, detects that it is already installed and doesn't add itself to the ownerReferences. If software A then creates CRs of type X and we remove the CRD X, all CustomResources get deleted.

We might be able to check all instances of CR X for "kudo.dev/managed: true" annotations, although that could be a lot at some point.

Not sure if this is a realistic scenario, or too far fetched, but deletion of something that's not created by KUDO would be *really* bad.

#### Specifications of Operator

### Risks and Mitigations

## Graduation Criteria

The MySQL Operator could be modified to deploy a central repo for backups and leverage those in each instance of MySQL. Spark Operator will be able to install the required CRDs on OperatorVersion installataion that can be used by instances of the Spark Operator

## Implementation History

* Initial KEP - 20190218
* Proposal for Implementation - 20200124

## Drawbacks

* More complicated Operator/OperatorVersion specs
* Implications of OperatorVersion installation making MORE cluster level changes than just a CRD.
* Security around leveraging the common component.  If deploying minio for backups, how do we ensure Instances don't restore someone else's data, or overwrite someone else's backup?

> * Shared Components: What happens when two different Operators require the same common object?

Reviewer 2: That would be handled by having multiple ownerReferences on the common object, one for each OperatorVersion that utilizes it, right?
